Document decision for MariaDB proxy for HA setups (#119)
vshn/application-catalog-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/decisions/mariadb-proxy.adoc

= VSHN Managed MariaDB HA Proxy solutions

== Problem

We want to provide a HA Galera service to our customers. In order to be able to properly use Galera, 

> we need a proxy solution in front of Galera forwards the queries to the "correct" galera node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we need a proxy solution in front of the Galera so that it forwards the queries to the "correct" Galera node.
```

There are multiple products on the market that can act as a proxy for galera. They all come with 
different feature sets and price tags.

== Solutions

> The following section contains the solutions that are the most widely used on the market. We list 
> them here with the features that they support:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following section contains a list of the solutions that are the most widely used on the market. The features that each solution supports are listed below the solution:
```

[cols="1,1,1,1",options="header"]
|===
|Requirement
|https://mariadb.com/kb/en/maxscale/[MariaDB Maxscale]
|https://proxysql.com/[ProxySQL]
|https://www.haproxy.org/[HAProxy]

|Proxy SQL traffic
|✅ (Layer 4 Proxy)
|✅ (Layer 4 Proxy)
|✅ (Layer 3 Proxy)

|Load-Balancing
|✅ (query based)
|✅ (query based)
|✅ (tcp based)

|SQL Aware
|✅
|✅
|❌

|High Availabilty
|✅
|✅
|✅

|Failover
|✅
|✅
|✅

|Metrics
|✅
|✅
|✅

|Query Routing
|✅
|✅
|❌

|Read-Write Splitting
|✅
|✅
|❌

|Helm Chart
|❌ (we have one ourselves)
|✅
|✅

|License
|BSL
|GPL 3
|GPL/LGPL

|Pricing

> |Only available with MariaDB Enterprice

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Only available with MariaDB Enterprise
```

|Free (Paid support available)
|Free (Paid enterprice version available)

|===

=== Analysis - MariaDB Maxscale

https://mariadb.com/kb/en/maxscale/[MariaDB Maxscale]

This is the official proxy solution by MariaDB itself.
It is by far the feature richest solution. However, this comes at a hefty price.

> Maxscale comes bundled with MariaDB Enterprice and is not available as a standalone solution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Maxscale comes bundled with MariaDB Enterprise and is not available as a standalone solution.
```

MariaDB doesn't publish any pricing lists, however research showed that MariaDB Enterprice for three nodes is in the lower 5 figures per year.

Advantages::

* Written and maintained by the MariaDB company
* Layer 4 (SQL aware proxy)
* Huge amount of features (including Read-write splitting)
* Easy to configure
* Support from MariaDB through Enterprise subscription

Disadvantages::

* BSL
* Only available through Enterprise subscription
* Licensing tracking required
* Slight performance impact due to being a Layer 4 proxy
* No official helm chart

=== Analysis - ProxySQL

|https://proxysql.com/[ProxySQL]

ProxySQL is a lightweight SQL proxy published under the GPL 3.0. The software itself is
free to use. The company offers support plans if desired.

> ProxySQL is not as feature rich Maxscale, but it still has a quite big feature list. Most notably the read-write splitting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ProxySQL is not as feature rich as Maxscale, but it still has a quite big feature list. Most notably the read-write splitting.
```

Advantages::

* OpenSource GPL 3
* Layer 4 (SQL aware proxy)
* Read-write splitting
* Galera Support
* Slight performance impact due to being a Layer 4 proxy
* Helm chart availble

Disadvantages::

* A bit more complex to configure than maxscale
* We don't have experience with this tool yet

=== Analysis - HAProxy

|https://www.haproxy.org/[HAProxy]

HAProxy is an open source multi purpose proxy and loadbalancer. It is known for it's high performance and ability to handle huge amounts of requests.
However, HAProxy is only able to proxy and loadbalance traffic on either HTTP/S or TCP level.
It doesn't understand SQL and hence can't load balance traffic depending on the query.

Advantages::

* OpenSource GPL/LGPL
* High performance
* We know HAProxy well
* Helm chart
* Easy to configure

Disadvantages::

* Layer 4 (TCP Proxy)
* No Loadbalancing based on query

== Decision

We use ProxySQL

== Rationale

Maxscale is only available as a bundle with MariaDB Enterprise, which is too expensive for our use case and would make the whole product very hard to sell.

> Athough we have quite some experience with HAProxy and is performing very well, it unfortunately lacks any support for SQL query based routing / load balancing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Athough we have quite some experience with HAProxy and it is performing very well, it unfortunately lacks any support for SQL query based routing / load balancing.
```

> This is a huge draw back and limits the usages of a galera cluster considerably as we won't the Galera nodes only during failover scenarios, but not for load balancing in general.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a huge draw back and limits the usages of a galera cluster considerably as it would work for the Galera nodes only during failover scenarios, but not for load balancing in general.
```

> ProxySQL is also a rather lightweight solution build for high performance. However, it can't keep up with the performance of the Layer 3 HAProxy solution.

Reviewer 3: >  However, it can't keep up with the performance of the Layer 3 HAProxy solution.

Are there some benchmarks? Or did you do your benchmarks yourself?

Author: I've added a footnote to some benchmarks done by percona
